Right fibrations (#176)
plt-amy/1lab: src/Cat/Displayed/Cartesian/Right.lagda.md

---
description: |
  We define right fibrations, and characterize their fibre categories.
---
```agda
open import Cat.Displayed.Base
open import Cat.Displayed.Cartesian.Discrete
open import Cat.Displayed.Functor
open import Cat.Prelude

import Cat.Reasoning
import Cat.Displayed.Cartesian
import Cat.Displayed.Morphism
import Cat.Displayed.Reasoning

module Cat.Displayed.Cartesian.Right
  {o ℓ o′ ℓ′}
  {ℬ : Precategory o ℓ}
  (ℰ : Displayed ℬ o′ ℓ′)
  where

open Cat.Reasoning ℬ
open Displayed ℰ
open Cat.Displayed.Cartesian ℰ
open Cat.Displayed.Morphism ℰ
open Cat.Displayed.Reasoning ℰ
```

# Right Fibrations

A [cartesian fibration] $\ca{E}$ is said to be a **right fibration** if every
morphism in $\ca{E}$ is cartesian.

```agda
record Right-fibration : Type (o ⊔ ℓ ⊔ o′ ⊔ ℓ′) where
  no-eta-equality
  field

>     is-fibration
>       : Cartesian-fibration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    is-fibration : Cartesian-fibration
```

    cartesian
      : ∀ {x y} {f : Hom x y}
      → ∀ {x′ y′} (f′ : Hom[ f ] x′ y′)
      → Cartesian f f′

  open Cartesian-fibration is-fibration public
```

> One notable fact is that all of the vertical morphisms of a right
> fibrations are invertible. In other words, if $\ca{E}$ is a right

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One notable fact is that every vertical morphism in a right
fibration is invertible. In other words, if $\ca{E}$ is a right
```

> fibration, then all of the fibre categories are groupoids. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fibration, then all of its fibre categories are groupoids. This
```

follows directly from the fact that vertical cartesian maps are
invertible.

```agda
right-fibration→vertical-invertible
  : Right-fibration
  → ∀ {x} {x′ x″ : Ob[ x ]} → (f′ : Hom[ id ] x′ x″) → is-invertible↓ f′
right-fibration→vertical-invertible rfib f′ =
  vertical+cartesian→invertible (Right-fibration.cartesian rfib f′)
```

More notably, this is an exact characterization of categories fibred
in groupoids! If $\ca{E}$ is a cartesian fibration where all vertical
morphisms are invertible, then it must be a right fibration.

```agda
vertical-invertible+fibration→right-fibration
  : Cartesian-fibration
  → (∀ {x} {x′ x″ : Ob[ x ]} → (f′ : Hom[ id ] x′ x″) → is-invertible↓ f′)
  → Right-fibration
vertical-invertible+fibration→right-fibration fib vert-inv
  .Right-fibration.is-fibration = fib
vertical-invertible+fibration→right-fibration fib vert-inv
  .Right-fibration.cartesian {x = x} {f = f} {x′ = x′} {y′ = y′} f′ = f-cart where
    open Cartesian-fibration fib
    open Cartesian-lift renaming (x′ to x-lift)
```

To see this, recall that cartesian morphisms are stable under

> vertical retracts. The cartesian lift $f^{*}$ of $f$ is obviously

Reviewer: Should there be a link to "stable under vertical retracts" here?

> cartesian, so it suffices to show that there is a vertical retract

Reviewer: Should that be "a vertical retraction"?

$x^{*} \to x'$. To construct this retract, we shall factorize $f'$
over $f \cdot id$; which yields a vertical morphism $i^{*} : x' \to x^{*}$.

> By our hypotheses, $i^{*}$ is invertible, and thus is a retract.

Reviewer: That should definitely be "is a retraction", right? Or, a retract of what, I guess?

What remains to be shown is that the inverse to $i^{*}$ factors
$f'$ and $f^{*}$; this follows from the factorization of $f'$ and
the fact that $i^{*}$ is invertible.

```agda
    x* : Ob[ x ]
    x* = has-lift f y′ .x-lift

    f* : Hom[ f ] x* y′
    f* = has-lift f y′ .lifting

    module f* = Cartesian (has-lift f y′ .cartesian)

    i* : Hom[ id ] x′ x*
    i* = f*.universal′ (idr f) f′

    module i*-inv = is-invertible[_] (vert-inv i*)

    i*⁻¹ : Hom[ id ] x* x′
    i*⁻¹ = i*-inv.inv′

    factors : f′ ∘′ i*⁻¹ ≡[ idr f ] f*
    factors = to-pathp⁻ $
      f′ ∘′ i*⁻¹               ≡⟨ shiftr _ (pushl′ _ (symP $ f*.commutesp (idr f) f′) {q = ap (f ∘_) (sym (idl _))}) ⟩
      hom[] (f* ∘′ i* ∘′ i*⁻¹) ≡⟨ weave _ (elimr (idl id)) _ (elimr′ _ i*-inv.invl′) ⟩
      hom[] f* ∎

    f-cart : Cartesian f f′
    f-cart = cartesian-vert-retract-stable
      (has-lift f y′ .cartesian)
      (inverses[]→from-has-section[] i*-inv.inverses′)
      factors
```

As a corollary, we get that all discrete fibrations are right fibrations.

> Intuitively this is true, as sets are 0-groupoids.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Intuitively, this is true, as sets are 0-groupoids.
```

```agda
discrete→right-fibration
  : Discrete-fibration ℰ
  → Right-fibration
discrete→right-fibration dfib =
  vertical-invertible+fibration→right-fibration
    (discrete→cartesian ℰ dfib)
    (discrete→vertical-invertible ℰ dfib)
```

## Fibred Functors and Right Fibrations

As every map in a right fibration is cartesian, every displayed functor
into a right fibration is automatically fibred.

```agda
functor+right-fibration→fibred

>   : ∀ {o₂ ℓ₂ o₂′ ℓ₂′}

Reviewer: nice 👍

Author: 😎
